Add readme (#1)
opendata-oss/opendata: README.md

# Overview

> OpenData is a collection of open source data infrastructure projects designed from ground up for objectstoraege. We aim to deliver highly focused, objectstore-native versions of online databases that can power your application stack. As of today, we have a competitive timeseries database and a data streaming backend. We plan to ship vector search, text search, and other database types over time. Contributions are welcome!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenData is a collection of open source data infrastructure projects designed from ground up for object storage. We aim to deliver highly focused, objectstore-native versions of online databases that can power your application stack. As of today, we have a competitive timeseries database and a data streaming backend. We plan to ship vector search, text search, and other database types over time. Contributions are welcome!
```

> OpenData is a collection of open source data infrastructure projects designed from ground up for objectstoraege. We aim to deliver highly focused, objectstore-native versions of online databases that can power your application stack. As of today, we have a competitive timeseries database and a data streaming backend. We plan to ship vector search, text search, and other database types over time. Contributions are welcome!

Reviewer: `objectstorage` or `object storage`?

2. OpenData relies completely on SlateDB's manifest implementation for reading and writing metadata.
3. OpenData relies on SlateDB's WAL format as an performant objectstore-native WAL.
4. On the query side, OpenData leverages Datafusion to build performant and functional query engines. 

As a general principle, we prefer common data and query components to be part of SlateDB and Datafusion respectivzely.

## Metadata 

TODO, but here's a sketch:

1. The metadata layer leverages SlateDB's [manifest](https://github.com/slatedb/slatedb/blob/main/rfcs/0001-manifest.md). The manifest contains the locations of all the files that comprise the data in the system. 
2. The general principle is that data is only read if the files are accessible via the manifest. 
3. SlateDB leverages compare-and-set operations that are available in every object store to atomically updatet the manifest.
4. Ingestors and Compactors flush data to objectstore, and then atomically update the locations in the manifest.
5. SlateDB further versions the metadata using epochs, which ensures that zombie writers can't roll versions back.

> 6. Readers of data, including Compactors and Query Executors, thus always get a consistent view of the metadata at any point in time. 

Author: Basic question: If the manifest is large, can it be read atomically from objectstorage? I assume there must be some guarantee at that level.

7. This allows basic snapshot isolation across reads and writes. 

# Our systems.

OpenData ships two systems today:

* TSDB: An objectstore native timeseries database that can serve as a backend for Prometheus. Its a great option for a low cost, easy to operate, grafana backend. Learn more about it here : <link to RFC>

> * EventStore: Think of it as Kafka 2.0. An objecstore native event streaming backend that supports millions of logs, so you can finally get a replayable log per key. Learn more about it here: <link to rfc>

Reviewer: Where does the name `EventStore` come from?

2. Inspired by the UNIX philosophy, we believe single purpose systems that compose well are superior to systems that try to solve many problems under one umbrella.
3. We believe that there is a general lack of objectstore native open source data systems, to the detriment of the developer community at large. 

## Our Vision

To address these structural problems with opensource data infrastructure today, OpenData systems adopt the following principles: 

1. Each OpenData product will target one core use case and aim to be best-in-class at it. 
2. Each OpenData product will be designed from ground up with object storage as a starting point.
3. Each OpenData product will be built on a common set of primitives. One set of primitives is [SlateDB](https://www.slatedb.io), but there may be others. 
4. Each product and every common component will be licensed under the MIT license. 
5. All OpenData products will be built with a uniform operational experience, which includes common CLI tooling, common versioning schemes, common configuration styles, and more.
6. Every OpenData product will be designed to compose with the others. 

> OpenData aims to put control back in the hands of developers. Your data is always in your custody, and OpenData makes it practical to serve that data to any app without needing multiple specialist engineers on staff.

Reviewer: Maybe the BYOC aspect should be emphasized more. WDYT?

Building performant, cost effective, and correct online systems on objectstorage takes special care. Successful designs all have to solve the problem of write batching, multiple levels of caching, and snapshot isolation for correctness. OpenData systems build on a common foundation to solve these problems. This common foundation gives OpenData systems a common set of operational tools, configuration systems, etc., that make our systems easier to operate in aggregate. 

# Architecture

Each OpenData product has a high level architecture that looks like this:

![OpenData high level architectural components](public/img/opendata-arch.png)

## Data Flow

The core concepts are best understood by following the typical data flow.

1. The API layer is specific to each database, and implements the appropriate read and write APIs for the database. When the API layer receives write requests, they are forwarded to the Ingestor services.

> 2. The Ingestor services are stateless. They batch writes coming from the API layer, flush the data in a Write-Ahead-Log (WAL) format which is optimized for high throughput writes to object storage, and update the Metadata. We describe the metadata layer in detail later, but for now it suffices to know that the matadata contains locations and versions of all files in the system. The metadata lives in objectstorage, and all OpenData systems use the same components to enable writing metadata updates atomically. Atomic updates to metadata ensure that readers and writers in the system operate on consistent views of the data in the system. The Ingestors are fairly similar across database types.

Author: I like this breakdown. For the TSDB, does the OTEL ingest basically implements the OTEL protocol and writes WAL files direct to S3? So in some sense the API and Ingestor is the same module?

> 3. There are two types of Compactors in the OpenData system. One type is called the WAL compactor. It takes new WAL files written by ingestors and write the WAL entries into a format that's optimized to serve the queries of each database. For example, a compactor for a TSDB will take a WAL file and write inverted indexes, dictionaries, etc. These read-optimized files are called Collections. 

Reviewer 2: This feels a little deep for the README. Perhaps a separate architecture document could get into the details of systems on top of SlateDb. I wonder if this doc could focus on the core abstractions: storage as key-values, readers (ingest), writers (query). My mental model of opendata is structured like this:

1) Root: The root of the system is SlateDb which implements the LSM abstraction and provides the hooks to control its behavior.
2) Core Data Structures: on top of SlateDb, we have the core storage modules. This basically defines the SlateDb record mapping and the core API to consume the data structure. We treat tsdb and log as two core data structures. The API of these data structures is modeled after SlateDb.
3) Ingest: On top of core data structures, we define ingest APIs which are basically providing the server abstraction to take client requests and invoke the write APIs on the underlying data structure. OTEL is an ingest layer for tsdb. For the log, we could build a Kafka adapter which accepts `Produce`requests.
4) Query: On top of core data structures, we also expose higher-level query functionality. While the core of tsdb data access may be primitive, we would define a prometheus query layer which works with PromQL. Or for the log, we could define a Kafka layer which works like a consumer or accepts `Fetch` requests.
